Hello friends in this video I will show
you how to heat up a camping tent with a
Finnish-style log stove also known as a
Finnish log torch there are several
methods to heating up a camping tent
without a portable metal stove you can
set up a long log gap fire outside the
tent just close enough so that the heat
would radiate through the tent wall also
you can heat up a large rock and bring
it inside the tent you can easily find a
large rock in the root ball of a falling
tree even in a snowy forest but this
video will demonstrate how to heat up a
camping tent using a stream of warm air
from a metal pipe running through a
Finnish log torch I have already tried
this method using traditional campfire
but was not happy with the results this
time I'm using a Finnish torch with a
curved pipe as a modification to the
prior method I should say upfront that I
was pleasantly surprised how well the
tent heating method worked this time
first of all we will need a metal pipe
for our experiment
I used the curved steel pipe from the
headrest of a vintage metal bed the
headrest was rusty so it took me some
time and effort to disassemble it into
parts and clean them both outside and
inside okay now we have all we need to
conduct the tent heating experiment in
the snowy forest a pipe thermometer and
wood
I stashed a few dry segments of a
fallen fir tree last summer so we could
save time on cutting it now I left the
wood segments wedged and suspended in
the original log so they could stay dry
now we need to make a Finnish log torch
the log torch unlike the Finnish log
candle keeps all the fire inside the
wood segment it burns
slower and more economically to maximize
the economy and duration of heating are
the two characteristics I want to
achieve in this project there are many
ways you can make a log torch but I'll
use the easiest one it is about 10
degrees Fahrenheit -12 Celsius
outside and all the moisture in the wood
freezes so it becomes fairly easy to
chop wet wood as the frozen moisture
swells the log from inside however my
log segments are dry because they were
kept suspended above the ground so it
isn't that easy to chop them without a
wedge to make a log torch tent heater
you need to chop a segment of wood into three or four large pieces and
remove the cool portion of each piece
just enough so that you could loosely
feed the pipe inside the formed channel
because I was chopping wood for two log
torches (for two experiments) I got warm
real quick my trusted Billinas #9
Finnish axe rose to the challenge I think
it is one of the best multi-purpose axes
out there I even used it to build my log
cabin at Ladoga Lake traditionally you
would reinforce a Finnish log torch with
viza a rope made from fir branch I will
leave a link to my video about how to
make such bushcraft rope below this time
however I will use my homemade clamper
and steel wire as it is a lot faster
time is valuable in the northern winter
forest
because the day is short and I need to
assemble two log torches and my tent
before dark the reason I need two log
torches is because I need to test two
metal pipe shapes a single-bent pipe and
a u-shaped pipe we will try a u-shaped
steel pipe experiment first obviously we
would have to insert the U-shaped pipe
into the torch's triangular opening
before clamping the torch assembly once
I added legs to this log torch it became
heavier but it is still fairly mobile I
can easily pick it up by its legs and
carry it to the tent in order to heat up
a tent,
well, we need a tent)))  this means it is
time to set up my tried and tested tent
model UP5 it is a spacious camping tent
for five people almost a small studio
apartment with no pesky neighbors and a
great location however it won't be easy
to heat up such a large space which
makes the experiment even more
interesting and trustworthy my double
wall russian-made tent has an
umbrella-like frame that allows you to
set it up quickly now it is time to fire
up our log torch as I said earlier I
nailed three legs to each log torch for
better air flow and stability next I
cleared a small spot from snow so that
the log torch wouldn't fall on the tent
once the snow melts under it I didn't
have a shovel so I just stomped and
pushed the snow aside with my legs I was
glad I had my custom tailored gaiters on
they prevented snow from getting into my
shoes and getting my feet wet I will
leave a link to the gaiter template below
in case you're interested as you can see
I nailed the legs with their longer
portions at the bottom and
checked the torch assembly with my weight
however I decided to install the torch
upside down to use its longer leg as a
pipe support this way the metal pipe
will be suspended in the air and it will
not press on snow under the torch or the
torch's inner burning part I made a V-cut
on the tip of a former leg and now the
heating pipe is well secured you can
also use two nails to secure it if you
don't have a sword to make a V-cut the
easiest way to start our log torch is
to plug the central hole at the bottom
with a piece of bark then stuff it with
dry branches and wood chips it only
takes one match to start the fire then I
didn't do a great job chopping and
reassembling the log segment into a
torch with no radial gaps
this means the fire will eat up the
torch faster through those gaps which is
why I put some snow in them to prolong
the torch's life once the log torch
reaches its cruising temperature you
won't see any flames outside the torch's
walls inside will slowly burn which in
turn will heat the fresh air inside the
pipe that is flowing up to the tent note
the fresh air gets into the pipe below
the level of the log torch preventing
any carbon monoxide from mixing into it
it is freezing outside and the long
aluminum pipe cools off quickly if the
first pipe segment is too hot to touch
the second segment that is closer to the
tent is noticeably cooler to improve the
torch's efficiency I decided to move it
closer to the tent and this is where I
made a mistake I didn't push the legs
all the way to the ground and I faced
the consequences later
my tent has two entrances so I could use
one door to run the heating pipe through
and use the other one for all other
needs note I'm not forcing the airflow
in any way yet the airflow is
significant I'm using a small feather to
demonstrate it admittedly my tent is
large and it will take at least an hour
to heat the top through such a small
diameter pipe without supercharging this
is why it's still freezing inside the
tent but I make it to wait to see if
this tent heating method works so I
decided to take a short nap in my cozy
sleeping bag I was napping for at least
an hour and a half before I got out of
the sleeping bag to measure the air
temperature the air got really warm
inside the tent even though I forgot to
close a small chimney hatch which means
it would have been even warmer inside
once I put my shoes on and looked
outside I saw that the log torch fell on
its side because I forgot to push its
legs all the way to the ground the log
torch melted snow and evenly which
caused it to topple I'm glad I didn't
put the torch too close to the tent as it
would have burned a hole in the wall
even though the toppled log torch could
have still worked longer I couldn't wait
to test a single-bend-pipe design of
this method so I prepared and fired up
my second torch to save time I used the
same legs with nails but this time I used
my clamper to reinforce the log torch
over the legs as well which pulled the
log pieces together even tighter
resulting in smaller gaps between them
thus resulted in longer burning time
also thanks to the additional metal wire
clamps the torch ended up being extra
strong I got a little carried away
jumping on it to demonstrate its
durability ))) I think I might adopt this
simple idea of just clamping parts
together with steel wire to make
primitive log furniture for my cabin I
hammered two nailes at the bottom opening
to prevent small branches from falling
through it it was easier and faster to
start the fire without a U-shaped pipe
sticking from the opening another
advantage is you can easily move a
burning torch from one place to another
something you couldn't really do with a
burning campfire this is why I decided I
like the single-bent pipe method better
because the U-shaped pipe cannot be
removed from the burning torch if needed
it is 10 degrees Fahrenheit -11 Celsius now the efficiency of such a log
heater depends greatly on the
temperature gradient in other words the
greater the temperature difference
inside and outside the tent the better
the air flow will be I reached 57
degrees +14 Celsius inside and that
is considering I didn't call the second
door fully so there is a 47 degrees
Fahrenheit 25 degrees Celsius
temperature gradient to be honest I
didn't expect such an impressive result
I would dare to suggest you can reach
tropical temperature values in a small
tent the temperature of the air coming
out from the pipe is definitely higher
than 140 degrees Fahrenheit
degree +60 Celsius unfortunately my
thermometer scale maxes out at 140 Fahrenheit
+60 degrees Celsius here are a few words
about the methods safety firstly there
is no fire inside the tent secondly
there is a constant fresh air flow
coming into the tent you are totally
protected against carbon monoxide
poisoning because the pipe gets the
fresh cold air below the level of the
burning log torch also a log stove can
be used for cooking food even while it's
heating up your tent I personally like
the single-bent pipe modification of the
method better you can put the pipe in or
take it out at any time which makes it
easier to start the fire to cook certain
dishes or to carry a burning log torch
to another location
however the U-shaped pipe scheme gets
the fresh air from the side and if a
small burning ember falls through the
torch you won't smell any smoke inside
the tent from my experience even if that
happens you can barely smell any smoke
inside the tent so my conclusion is this
it was an interesting experience and
successful experiment it is labor
consuming but safe and effective
besides carrying three short metal pipes
is a lot easier than carrying a portable
metal stove while traveling in the snowy
wilderness
I think this method can be further
improved if you have any thoughts how
you can make it even more efficient
please write it below I would love to
hear your suggestions lastly if you
extinguish a locked torch a little
before it is fully burned you can get
yourself an unusual piece of primitive
furniture I haven't quite figured out
how I could use it let me know if you have
any idea what can be done with it
the log torch idea has a lot of other
practical applications for example I
recently published a video about an
original bushcraft dish that I called a
vertical shish kebab
it is a skewered spiral potato with a
hot dog inside
I have grilled the dish on the campfire
many times and always found it delicious
however the vertical cooking method has
its advantages firstly you don't have to
rotate the skewer yet the dish
cooks quicker and more evenly secondly
skewered dishes cooked in the vertical
stove taste better than kebabs cooked
on traditional grills regular kebabs
drip fat on the coals causing it to
taste and smells slightly burned while
kebab dishes cooked in vertical stoves
do not drip fat on fire but rather self -basting which enhances their own taste
when I cooked my skewered spiraled
potato dish the seasoning fat ran down
the potato as it cooked basting it with
meaty taste I don't think I can go back
to traditional horizontal grilling a
more detailed instruction on how to make
a vertical stove and prepare food in it
can be seen on my video: Swedish Torch/
Stove Vertical Cooking / My Bushcraft
Recipes the link is below if you liked
this video perhaps you could share it
with your friends let good people watch
good videos this is Max Egorov, st.
Petersburg, Russia and a final note I
only produce one or two videos max a
month and if you don't want to miss new
content like this you can click on the
bell reminder for notifications I hope
to see you back on Adovoko MAKES